# Creating Products with Grid on Splinter

<!--
  Copyright (c) 2018-2020 Cargill Incorporated
  Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
  https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
-->

This procedure explains how to create and manage Grid products
(trade item data) using Grid's command-line interface.

This procedure starts with steps to connect to a Splinter node and set
environment variables to simplify entering the `grid` commands in the procedure.
Next, it explains how to define a product with a product YAML file, create the
product with `grid product create`, and display product information with
`grid product list`.
Finally, this procedure shows how to change a product with `grid product
update`, then delete it with `grid product delete` when it is no longer
needed.

## Prerequisites

* For Grid on Sawtooth:

    - A working Grid node.
      <br><br>

* For Grid on Splinter:

    - Two (or more) nodes running Grid on Splinter.

    - An approved Splinter circuit that has two (or more) member nodes.

    - A fully qualified service ID for the scabbard service on this circuit, in the
      format `CircuitID::ServiceString`. This procedure uses the example ID
      `01234-ABCDE::gsAA`.

  Tip: Use `splinter circuit list` to display the circuit ID, then run `splinter
  circuit show CIRCUIT_ID` to see the four-character service string (also
  called the "partially qualified service ID").
  In the example Docker environment, you must run this command in the node's
  `splinterd` container.

* The Grid daemon's endpoint (URL and port) on one or both nodes.
  The example environment uses `http://localhost:8080`.

* The ID of an existing Pike organization that will own the new products. You
  must be defined as an agent with full product permissions for this
  organization. That is, one agent must be identified with your public key and
  must have permission to create, update, and delete products.

  Tip: You can use `curl` to request organization and agent information from
  the Grid REST API, as in these examples:

  `$ curl http://localhost:8080/organization?service_id=01234-ABCDE::gsAA`

  `$ curl http://localhost:8080/agent?service_id=01234-ABCDE::gsAA`

* Existing public/private key files in `$HOME/.grid/keys/` (as generated by
  `grid keygen`). The example environment uses the key files
  `$HOME/.grid/keys/alpha-agent.priv` and `$HOME/.grid/keys/alpha-agent.pub` to
  indicate that you will be acting as your organization's agent to add products
  from the alpha node.

* An existing schema for the new product. The schema name must be `gs1_product`,
  which tells Grid that the product schema will use the GS1 namespace.
  For the commands to create a product schema, see
  [grid/examples/splinter/README.md](https://github.com/hyperledger/grid/tree/master/examples/splinter#demonstrate-grid-smart-contract-functionality).

## Procedure

**IMPORTANT**: The commands in this procedure show host names, IDs, Docker
container names, and other values from the example Grid environment that are
defined by
[`grid/examples/splinter/docker-compose.yaml`](https://github.com/hyperledger/grid/blob/master/examples/splinter/docker-compose.yaml)
and [`grid/examples/sawtooth/docker-compose.yaml`](https://github.com/hyperledger/grid/blob/master/examples/sawtooth/docker-compose.yaml)
This file sets up the nodes `alpha-node-000` and `beta-node-000` and runs the
Grid and Splinter components in separate containers; these names appear in
example prompts and commands. (See [Running Hyperledger Grid on
Splinter]({% link docs/0.2/grid_on_splinter.md %}) or [Running Hyperledger Grid on
Sawtooth]({% link docs/0.2/grid_on_sawtooth.md %}) for more information.)

If you are not using this example environment, replace these items with the
actual values for your environment when entering each command.

### Connect to a Grid Node

1. Connect to the first node's `gridd` container and start a bash session.

   For the example environment, use this command to connect to the `gridd-alpha`
   container and run Grid commands on `alpha-node-000`.

   ```
   $ docker exec -it gridd-alpha bash
   root@gridd-alpha:/#
   ```

### Set Up Your Environment

Set the following Grid environment variables to specify information for the
`grid` commands in this procedure.

{:start="2"}

2. Set `GRID_DAEMON_KEY` to the base name of your public/private key files
   (the example environment uses `alpha-agent`).  This environment variable
   replaces the `-k` option on the `grid` command line.

   ```
   root@gridd-alpha:/# export GRID_DAEMON_KEY="alpha-agent"
   ```

   **Note**: Although this variable has "daemon" in the name, it should
   reference the ***user key files*** in `$HOME/.grid/keys`, not the Grid
   daemon's key files in `/etc/grid/keys`.

1. Set `GRID_DAEMON_ENDPOINT` to the Grid daemon's endpoint (URL and port),
   such as `http://localhost:8080`. This environment variable replaces the
   `-url` option on the `grid` command line.

   ```
   root@gridd-alpha:/# export GRID_DAEMON_ENDPOINT="http://localhost:8080"
   ```

1. Set `GRID_SERVICE_ID` to the fully qualified service ID (such as
   `01234-ABCDE::gsAA`) for the scabbard service on the circuit. This
   environment variable replaces the `--service_id` option on the `grid`
   command line.

   ```
   root@gridd-alpha:/# export GRID_SERVICE_ID="01234-ABCDE::gsAA"
   ```

   Tip: See [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) for the `splinter` commands that
   display the circuit ID and four-character service ID string.

### Define and Create a Product

Each product requires an organization ID (the owner) and at least one agent
with permission to create, update, and delete the product. There must also
be an existing product schema for the product's properties.
See [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) for more information.

{:start="5"}

5. Create a product definition file, in YAML format, that specifies the
   following information:

   * Product namespace (such as GS1) that corresponds with the product schema
     name (such as `gs1_product`).
   * Product ID (such as a GTIN)
   * Owner (organization ID)
   * Set of product properties (each with a name, data type, and value
     that conforms to the data type)
     <br><br>

   ```yaml
   - product_namespace: "GS1"
     product_id: "013600000929"
     owner: "013600"
     properties:
      product_name: "Truvia 80 ct."
      image_url: "https://target.scene7.com/is/image/Target/GUEST_b7a6e983-b391-40a5-ad89-2f906bce5743?fmt=png&wid=1400&qlt=80"
      brand_name: "Truvia"
      product_description: "Truvia Sugar 80CT"
      gpc: 30016951
      net_content: "80CT"
      target_market: 840
   ```

   Tip: Use a YAML linter to validate the new file is formatted correctly.

1. Use `docker cp` to copy the file into the `gridd-alpha` container.

   ```
   $ docker cp product.yaml gridd-alpha:/
   ```

1. Add the new product by using the `grid product create` command to specify the
   definition in the `product.yaml` file.

   ```
   root@gridd-alpha:/# grid product create --file product.yaml
   ```

   This command creates and submits a transaction to add the product data to the
   distributed ledger. If the transaction is successful, all other nodes in the
   circuit can view the product data.

   **Note**: This command does not display any output. Instead, check the log
   messages on the console (or the terminal window where you started the Grid
   Docker environment) for the success or failure of this operation.

### Display Product Information

{:start="8"}

8. List all existing products to verify that the new product has been added.

   ```
   root@gridd-alpha:/# grid product list
   ID             NAMESPACE OWNER
   013600000929   GS1       013600
   ```

1. (Optional) You can connect to a different node and repeat the last two
   commands to verify that the product has been shared with all nodes on the
   circuit.

    a. Open a new terminal and connect to the other node's `gridd` container
       (such as `gridd-beta`).

      ```
      $ docker exec -it gridd-beta bash
      ```

    b. Set the `GRID_SERVICE_ID` environment variable to the full service ID
       for this node (such as `01234-ABCDE::xyBB`).

      ```
      root@gridd-beta:/# export GRID_SERVICE_ID="01234-ABCDE::xyBB"
      ```

    c. Display all products. The output should be the same as on the first node.

      ```
      root@gridd-beta:/# grid product list
      Product namespace: "013600000929"
       Product Type: "GS1"
       Owner: "013600"
       Properties:
              Property Name: "product_name"
              Data Type: "String"
              Bytes Value: Some([])
              Boolean Value: Some(false)
              Number Value: Some(0)
              String Value: Some("Truvia 80 ct.")
              Enum Value: Some(0)
              Struct Values: Some([])
              Lat/Long Values: Some(LatLong { latitude: 0, longitude: 0 })
         .
         .
         .
      ```

### Update a Product

To update a product, you must be an agent for the product owner (the
organization that is identified in the product definition).

1. Modify the definition in the product YAML file (such as `product.yaml`).

   You don't have to use the same file that was used to create the product,
   but the file must specify the same information (product ID, type, and owner)
   and present the product properties in the same order.

1. Use the `update` subcommand for `grid product` to submit the changes
   to the distributed ledger.

   ```
   root@gridd-beta:/# grid product update --file product.yaml
   ```

### Delete a Product

**IMPORTANT**: Deleting a product is a potentially hazardous operation that
must be done with care. Before you delete a product, make sure that no
member organizations on the circuit require the product data.

To delete a product, use the `delete` subcommand with the product ID and
namespace (for example, ID `013600000929` and namespace `GS1`).

   ```
   root@gridd-beta:/# grid product delete 013600000929 --namespace GS1
   ```

Tip: Use `grid product list` to display the product ID and namespace.
