# Creating Schemas

<!--
  Copyright (c) 2018-2020 Cargill Incorporated
  Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
  https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
-->

This procedure explains how to create and manage Grid schemas
using Grid's command-line interface.
Features such as Grid Product and Grid Location require a schema that specifies
the format and type of the properties available when creating the item.

This procedure starts with steps to connect to a Splinter node and set
environment variables to simplify entering the `grid` commands in the procedure.

Next, it explains how to define a schema YAML file, using a GS1 product schema
as an example, then use `grid schema create` to submit a transaction that adds
the schema to the distributed ledger.

Finally, this procedure shows how to change a schema with `grid schema update`.

## Prerequisites

* For Grid on Sawtooth:

    - A working Grid node.
      <br><br>

* For Grid on Splinter:

    - Two or more working Grid nodes. (See [Running Grid on
      Splinter](grid_on_splinter.md) for the procedure to set up and run Grid
      in Docker containers.) The examples in this procedure show two nodes,
      `alpha-node-000` and `beta-node-000`, that are running in a Docker
      environment.

    - An approved Splinter circuit with two or more member nodes.
      (See [Creating Splinter Circuits]({% link
      docs/0.2/creating_splinter_circuits.md %}) for more information.)
      This procedure assumes that there is a circuit with `alpha-node-000` and
      `beta-node-000` as members.

    - A fully qualified service ID for the scabbard service on this circuit, in
      the format <code><i>CircuitID</i>::<i>ServiceString</i></code>.
      (See [Determine the Service
      ID]({% link docs/0.2/creating_splinter_circuits.md
      %}#determine-the-service-id) for the commands to display this
      information.) This procedure uses the example ID `01234-ABCDE::gsAA`.

* The Grid daemon's endpoint (URL and port) on one or both nodes.
  This procedure uses `http://localhost:8080`.

* The ID of an existing Pike organization that will own the new schema. You
  must be defined as an agent with full schema permissions for this
  organization. That is, one agent must be identified with your public key and
  must have permission to create and update schemas.
  (See [Creating Organizations]({% link docs/0.2/creating_organizations.md %})
  for more information.)

* Existing public/private key files in `$HOME/.grid/keys/` (as generated by
  `grid keygen`). The example environment uses the key files
  `$HOME/.grid/keys/alpha-agent.priv` and `$HOME/.grid/keys/alpha-agent.pub` to
  indicate that you will be acting as your organization's agent to add schemas
  from the alpha node.

## Procedure

**IMPORTANT**: The commands in this procedure show host names, IDs, Docker
container names, and other values from the example Grid environment that are
defined by
[`grid/examples/splinter/docker-compose.yaml`](https://github.com/hyperledger/grid/blob/master/examples/splinter/docker-compose.yaml)
and [`grid/examples/sawtooth/docker-compose.yaml`](https://github.com/hyperledger/grid/blob/master/examples/sawtooth/docker-compose.yaml)
This file sets up the nodes `alpha-node-000` and `beta-node-000` and runs the
Grid and Splinter components in separate containers; these names appear in
example prompts and commands. (See [Running Hyperledger Grid on
Splinter]({% link docs/0.2/grid_on_splinter.md %}) or [Running Hyperledger Grid on
Sawtooth]({% link docs/0.2/grid_on_sawtooth.md %}) for more information.)

If you are not using this example environment, replace these items with the
actual values for your environment when entering each command.

### Connect to a Grid Node

1. Connect to the first node's `gridd` container and start a bash session.

   For the example environment, use this command to connect to the `gridd-alpha`
   container and run Grid commands on `alpha-node-000`.

   ```
   $ docker exec -it gridd-alpha bash
   root@gridd-alpha:/#
   ```

### Set Up Your Environment

Set the following Grid environment variables to specify information for the
`grid` commands in this procedure.

{:start="2"}

2. Set `GRID_DAEMON_KEY` to the base name of your public/private key files
   (the example environment uses `alpha-agent`).  This environment variable
   replaces the `-k` option on the `grid` command line.

   ```
   root@gridd-alpha:/# export GRID_DAEMON_KEY="alpha-agent"
   ```

   **Note**: Although this variable has "daemon" in the name, it should
   reference the ***user key files*** in `$HOME/.grid/keys`, not the Grid
   daemon's key files in `/etc/grid/keys`.

1. Set `GRID_DAEMON_ENDPOINT` to the Grid daemon's endpoint (URL and port),
   such as `http://localhost:8080`. This environment variable replaces the
   `-url` option on the `grid` command line.

   ```
   root@gridd-alpha:/# export GRID_DAEMON_ENDPOINT="http://localhost:8080"
   ```

1. For Grid on Splinter, set `GRID_SERVICE_ID` to the fully qualified service
   ID (such as `01234-ABCDE::gsAA`) for the scabbard service on the circuit.
   This environment variable replaces the `--service_id` option on the `grid`
   command line.

   ```
   root@gridd-alpha:/# export GRID_SERVICE_ID="01234-ABCDE::gsAA"
   ```

   Tip: See [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) for the `splinter` commands that
   display the circuit ID and four-character service ID string.

### Define and Create a Schema

{:start="5"}

5. Create a schema definition file, in YAML format, that specifies the
   following information:

   * Schema name, such as `gs1_product` (this string tells Grid that the schema
     will use the GS1 namespace and will be associated with all GS1 products)
   * Description
   * Set of item properties (each with a name, data type, and value
     that conforms to the data type)
     <br><br>

    ```yaml
    - name: gs1_product
      description: GS1 product schema
      properties:
        - name: product_name
          data_type: STRING
          description: ""
          required: true
        - name: image_url
          data_type: STRING
          description: ""
          required: false
        - name: brand_name
          data_type: STRING
          description: ""
          required: true
        - name: product_description
          data_type: STRING
          description: ""
          required: true
        - name: gpc
          data_type: NUMBER
          number_exponent: 1
          description: ""
          required: true
        - name: net_content
          data_type: STRING
          description: ""
          required: true
        - name: target_market
          data_type: NUMBER
          number_exponent: 1
          description: ""
          required: true
    ```

    Tip: Use a YAML linter to validate the new file is formatted correctly.

1. Use `docker cp` to copy the file into the `gridd-alpha` container.

   ```
   $ docker cp product_schema.yaml gridd-alpha:/
   ```

1. Add the new schema as defined in the YAML file (for example,
   `product_schema.yaml`).

    ```
    root@gridd-alpha:/# grid schema create product_schema.yaml
    ```

    This command creates and submits a transaction to add the schema to the
    distributed ledger. If the transaction is successful, all other nodes in the
    circuit can view the schema.

### Display Schema Information

{:start="8"}

8. List all existing schemas to verify that the new schema has been added.

   ```
   root@gridd-alpha:/# grid schema list
   ```

1. To see the details for a specific schema, use `grid schema show`  with the
   schema name (such as `gs1_product`).

   ```
   root@gridd-alpha:/# grid schema show gs1_product
   ```

1. (Optional) You can connect to a different node and repeat the last two
   commands to verify that the schema has been shared with all nodes on the
   circuit.

    a. Open a new terminal and connect to the other node's `gridd` container
       (such as `gridd-beta`).

      ```
      $ docker exec -it gridd-beta bash
      ```

    b. Set the `GRID_SERVICE_ID` environment variable to the full service ID
       for this node (such as `01234-ABCDE::xyBB`).

      ```
      root@gridd-beta:/# export GRID_SERVICE_ID="01234-ABCDE::xyBB"
      ```

    c. Display all schemas. The output should be the same as on the first node.

      ```
      root@gridd-beta:/# grid schema list
      ```

    d. Display the details of a specific schema (such as `gs1_product`).

      ```
      root@gridd-beta:/# grid schema show gs1_product
      ```

### Update a Schema

To change a schema, you must be an agent for the organization that is
identified in the schema definition.

1. Modify the definition in the schema YAML file (such as
   `product_schema.yaml`).

   You don't have to use the same file that was used to create the schema,
   but the file must specify the same name and present the properties in the
   same order.

1. Use the `update` subcommand for `grid schema` to submit the YAML file's
   changes to the distributed ledger.

   ```
   root@gridd-beta:/# grid schema update product_schema.yaml
   ```

## Next Steps

Once you have an a product schema, you can create products based on this schema.
For more information, see
[Creating Products]({% link docs/0.2/creating_products.md %}).
